TRAVEL STORIES

                       THE GRAND CAÑON OF ARIZONA

                       BY WILLIAM HASKELL SIMPSON


Many of those who seek and love earth's greatest scenery have declared
that they found it at the Grand Cañon of Arizona. Travelers flock to it
from the ends of the earth, though the majority of the visitors,
numbering every year about a hundred thousand, are Americans.

The Grand Cañon of the Colorado River, in northern Arizona, is indeed a
world wonder, and there is no other chasm in the world worthy to be
compared with it. It is more than two hundred miles long, including
Marble Cañon, is from ten to thirteen miles wide in the granite gorge
section, and is more than a mile deep. It was created ages and ages ago
by the erosive action of water, wind, and frost, and it is still being
deepened and widened imperceptibly year by year.

The Colorado River, which drains a region of three hundred thousand
square miles and is two thousand miles long from the rise of its
principal source, is formed in southern Utah by the junction of the
Grand and the Green Rivers, and, flowing through Utah and Arizona to
tide-water at the Gulf of California, it dashes in headlong torrent
through this titanic gorge--this dream of color, tinted like a rainbow
or a sunset.

The cañon is reached by a railroad running to the rim, and may be
visited any day in the year. It is unlike most other scenery, because
when standing on its rim you look down instead of up. Imagine a
gigantic trough, filled with bare mountains on each side and sloping to
a narrow channel, which in turn is carved deeply and steeply out of
solid granite. You come upon it unawares from the level, timbered,
plateau country. The experience is an absolutely unique one. Only when
you go down one of the trails to the bottom and look up is the view
more nearly like other grand mountain vistas. The first glimpse always
is from the upper edge, and, having no previous standard of
measurement, you find it difficult to adjust yourself to this strange
condition. The distant rim swims in a bluish haze. The nearer red rocks
forming the inner cañon buttes--crowned with massive table-lands that
look like temples, minarets, and battlements--reflect the sunlight in
myriad hues. It seems a vast illusion rather than reality. No wonder
that the first look often awes the spectator into silence and tears!

But, before you have been here long, you will wish to know how it all
happened. You will ask how the cañon was made.

That question was asked by a little girl of Captain John Hance, one of
the pioneer guides. Hance contests with a few other early comers the
distinction of being the biggest "romancer" in Arizona. He told her
that he dug it all himself.

"Why, Captain Hance!" she said, in astonishment, "what did you do with
all the dirt?"

He quickly replied, "I built the San Francisco Peaks off there with it!"

Just between ourselves, no one absolutely can tell just how the miracle
occurred, for no human being was there at the time. But the geologist
has put together, bit by bit, thousands of facts, dug from the rocks
which here lie exposed like a mammoth layer-cake and his explanation is
so convincing that it must stand as at least the probable truth.

Here may be seen rocks of the four geological periods which are among
the very oldest of our earth. The rocks of later periods were here
once, too, making a layer more than two miles high resting on what is
to-day the top, but in some remote age they were shaved off by some
great natural force, perhaps a glacier.

The eating away of the rocks which formed the cañon itself is modern.
Scientists say it was done, as it were, last Monday or Tuesday, for it
was when the top two thirds had been "shaved off," as we have said,
that the Colorado River began to cut the Grand Cañon through the rocks
that formed the lower third.

While the cracking of the crust, caused by internal fires, may have
helped the process of cañon-making, the result of erosion is seen
everywhere. Every passing shower, every desert wind, every snowfall,
changes the contour of the region imperceptibly but surely. The cañon
is Nature's open book in which we may read how the earth was built.

With the coming of the railroad, when this century was yet a baby,
tourists began to flock in, hotels were built, highways constructed,
trails bettered, and other improvements made. To-day the traveler finds
here every comfort.

Although first glimpsed by white men in 1540, when the Spanish
conquistadors appeared,--one expedition journeying from the Hopi
pueblos in Tusayan across the Painted Desert,--the big cañon remained
unvisited, except for Indians and trappers, until 1858, when Lieutenant
Ives, of the army engineer corps, made a brief exploration of the lower
reaches of the Colorado, coming out at Cataract Creek. It was not
thoroughly explored until the year 1869, when Major John W. Powell made
his memorable voyage from the entrance to the mouth of the great gorge,
passing down the Green and Colorado Rivers. Though he lost two boats
and four men, he pushed on to the end. It is fitting that the United
States Government has erected to his memory a massive monument of
native rock with bronze tablets on one of the points near El Tovar
Hotel.

Powell's outfit consisted of nine men and four rowboats. The distance
traveled exceeded one thousand miles, from what is now Greenriver,
Utah, through the series of cañons to the mouth of the Rio Virgin. In
the spring of 1871 he again started with three boats and descended the
river to the Crossing of the Fathers. The following summer Lee's Ferry
was his point of departure and he went as far as the mouth of Kanab
Wash.

Beginning with the Russell and Monett party, in 1907, several others
have essayed to duplicate Powell's achievement, and successfully, too,
though without adding to our scientific knowledge of the cañon. The
trips are exceedingly dangerous, for the rapids conceal rocks that
would wreck any boat, and the currents are treacherous. It is safer, by
far, to sit at home and read Powell's story.

The average traveler spends too short a time at the cañon. He arrives
in the morning and leaves in the evening. Those wise ones, who go about
things in more leisurely fashion, stay from three days to a week.

There are certain things that everybody does. Simply by looking through
the big telescope at the "lookout," an intimate view may be had of the
far-off north rim and of the river gorge five miles below in an air
line. It is easier than actually going to those places, though both are
accessible. The north rim, or Kaibab Plateau, is about a quarter of a
mile higher than the south rim, where you are standing, and is thickly
forested with giant pines. Clear streams are found here, and wild game
in abundance. Mountain-lions hide in the rocks, and bobcats haunt the
trees. It is the home of the bear, too; you may see two "sassy" young
sample specimens outside the house where the Indians stay, opposite El
Tovar Hotel. The way across the cañon to the north side is not an easy
one, as the Colorado must be crossed in a steel cage suspended from a
cable, which stretches dizzily from bank to bank. Then follows the
stiff climb up Bright Angel Creek, along a trail seldom used.

The Hopi House, where the Indians give their dances every evening for
free entertainment of guests, is another attraction. It is occupied by
representatives of the Snake Dance Hopis, whose home is many miles
northeast across the Painted Desert. You won't see the Snake Dance, of
course, but you will witness ceremonies just as interesting,
participated in by men, women and children of the Hopi and Navajo
tribes. The little tots, especially, are very "cute." They execute
difficult steps in perfect time and with the utmost solemnity, while
the drummer beats the tom-tom, and the singer chants his weird songs.

Here you may see Navajo silversmiths at work, fashioning curious
ornaments from Mexican coins and turquoise, also deft weavers of
blankets and baskets.

The Havasupai Reservation, in Cataract Cañon, is about sixty miles
away, and Indians from that hidden place of the blue waterfalls are
frequent visitors around the railway station.

All of these Indians understand the language of Uncle Sam. Many of them
are Carlisle or Riverside graduates, and one young Hopi is writing a
history of his tribe in university English.

Have you ever ridden a mule? If not, you will learn how at the cañon,
for only on muleback can travelers easily make the trip down and up the
trail. Walking is all right going down, but the climb coming back will
tire out the strongest hiker: hence the mule, or burro, long as to
ears, long as to memory, and "sad as to his songs."

Of the visitors, fat and lean, tall and short, old and young, to each
is assigned a mule of the right size and disposition, together with a
khaki riding-suit, which fits more or less, all surmounted by hats that
are useful rather than ornamental. It is a motley crowd that starts off
in the morning, in charge of careful guides, from the roof of the
world--a motley crowd, but gay and suspiciously cheerful. It is
likewise a motley crowd that slowly climbs up out of the earth toward
evening--but subdued and inclined still to cling to the patient mule.

"What did you see?" asked curious friends.

Quite likely they saw more mule than cañon, being concerned with the
immediate views along the trail rather than the thrilling vistas
unfolding at each turn. Nine out of ten of them could tell you their
mule's name, yet would hesitate to say much about Zoroaster or Angel's
Gate. They could identify the steep descent of the Devil's Corkscrew,
for they were a part of it; the mystery of the deep gulf, stretching
overhead and all around, probably did not reach them. That is the
penalty one pays for being too much occupied with things close at hand.

Yet only by crawling down into the awe-full depths can the cañon be
fully comprehended afterward from the upper rim.

All trail parties take lunch on the river's bank. The Colorado is about
two hundred feet wide here, and lashed into foam by the rapids. Its
roar is like that of a thousand express-trains. The place seems
uncanny. At night, under the stars, you appear to be in another world.

No water is to be found on the south rim for one hundred miles east and
west of El Tovar, except what falls in the passing summer showers, and
that is quickly soaked up by the dry soil. All the water used for the
small army of horses and mules maintained by the transportation
department, likewise for the big hotel and annex and other facilities,
is hauled by rail in tank-cars from a point one hundred and twenty-five
miles distant. The vast volume of water in the Colorado River, only
seven miles away, is not available. No way has yet been found to pump
economically the precious fluid from a river that to-day is thirty feet
deep, and to-morrow is seventy feet deep, flowing below you at the
depth of over a mile.

Another curious fact is this: the drainage on the south side is away
from the cañon, not into it. The ground at the edge of the abyss is
higher than it is a few miles back.

During the winter of 1917 there was an unusual fall of snow, which
covered the sides and bottom of the cañon down to the river. Nothing
like it had been seen for a quarter of a century. Generally, what
little snow falls is confined to the rim and the upper slopes. At times
the immense gulf was completely filled with clouds, and then the cañon
looked like an inland lake. As a rule, this part of Arizona is a land
of sunshine; the high altitude means cool summers; the southerly
latitude means pleasant winters.

Naturally, a place like the Grand Cañon has attracted many great
artists and other distinguished visitors. Moving-picture companies have
staged thrilling photo-plays in these picturesque surroundings.
Photographers by the score have trained their finest batteries of
lenses on rim, trail, and river, some of them getting remarkable
results in natural colors.

Unmoved by this galaxy of talent, however, the Grand Cañon refuses
wholly to give up its secrets. Always there will be something new for
the seeker and interpreter of to-morrow.

The Grand Cañon is a forest reserve and a national monument. A bill has
been introduced in Congress to make it a national park. Meanwhile, the
United States Forest Service and the railway company are doing all they
can to increase the facilities for visitors. A forest ranger is located
near by. His force looks out for fires, and polices the Tusayan Forest
district. Covering such a large area with only a few men, a system has
been worked out for locating fires quickly. Fifteen minutes saved,
often means victory snatched from defeat. Water is not available, for
this is a waterless region except during the short rainy season, so
recourse must be had to other devices, such as back-firing and
smothering with dirt.

Official government names for prominent objects in the region have been
substituted for most of the old-time local names. For example, your
attention is invited to Yavapai Point, so called after a tribe of
Indians, instead of O'Neill's Point. These American Indian words are
musical and belong to the country, and the names of Spanish explorers
and Aztec rulers also seem suited to the place. Thus the great cañon
has been saved the fate of bearing the hackneyed or prosaic names that
have been given to many places of wonderful natural beauty throughout
our country. Think of a "Lover's Leap" down an abyss of several
thousand feet! That atrocity, happily, has been spared us in this
favored region.

This great furrow on the brow of Arizona never can be made common by
the hand of man. It is too big for ordinary desecration. Always it will
be the ideal Place of Silence. Let us continue to hope that the incline
railway will not be established here, suitable though it may be
elsewhere, nor the merry-go-round. The useful automobile is barred on
the highway along the edge of the chasm, though it is permitted in
other sections.

It has been my good fortune to meet at the cañon many noted artists,
writers, lecturers, "movie" celebrities, singers, and preachers. The
impression made upon each one of them by this titanic chasm is almost
always the same. At first, outward indifference--on guard not to be
overwhelmed, for they have seen much, the wide world over. Then a
restrained enthusiasm, but with emotions well in check. After longer
acquaintance, more enthusiasm and less restraint. At the end, full
surrender to the magic spell.
